# Other Internet Protocols

## Dynamic Host Configuration Protocol (DHCP)

As the computer need IP address to communicate so when a computer connects to a network, the Dynamic Host Configuration Protocol or DHCP as it is commonly known, is used to assign the computer an IP address.

The computer communicates over User Datagram Protocol (UDP) using the protocol with a type of server called a DHCP server. The server keeps track of computers on the network and their IP addresses. It will assign the computer an IP address and respond over the protocol to let it know which IP address to use. Once the computer has an IP address, it can communicate with other computers on the network.

## Domain Name System Protocol (DNS)

The Domain Name System (DNS) is the phonebook of the Internet. Humans access information online through domain names, like meta.com or espn.com. Web browsers interact through Internet Protocol (IP) addresses. DNS translates domain names to IP addresses so browsers can load Internet resources.

Each device connected to the Internet has a unique IP address which other machines use to find the device. DNS servers eliminate the need for humans to memorize IP addresses such as 192.168.1.1 (in IPv4), or more complex newer alphanumeric IP addresses such as 2400:cb00:2048:1::c629:d7a2 (in IPv6). [For further reading...](https://www.cloudflare.com/learning/dns/what-is-dns/)

## Internet Message Access Protocol (IMAP)

IMAP allows you to access your email wherever you are, from any device. When you read an email message using IMAP, you aren't actually downloading or storing it on your computer; instead, you're reading it from the email service. As a result, you can check your email from different devices, anywhere in the world: your phone, a computer, a friend's computer.

IMAP only downloads a message when you click on it, and attachments aren't automatically downloaded.

## Simple Mail Transfer Protocol (SMTP)

SMTP (Simple Mail Transfer Protocol) is a TCP/IP protocol used in sending and receiving email. SMTP is used most commonly by email clients, including Gmail, Outlook, Apple Mail and Yahoo Mail.

SMTP can send and receive email, but email clients typically use a program with SMTP for sending email. Because SMTP is limited in its ability to queue messages at the receiving end, it's usually used with either Post Office Protocol 3 (POP3) or Internet Message Access Protocol (IMAP), which lets the user save messages in a server mailbox and download them periodically from a server. SMTP is typically limited to and relied on to send messages from a sender to a recipient.

## Post Office Protocol (POP)

The Post Office Protocol (POP) is an older protocol used to download emails to an email client. The main difference in using POP instead of IMAP is that POP will delete the emails on the server once they have been downloaded to your local device. Although it is no longer commonly used in email clients, developers often use it to implement email automation as it is a more straightforward protocol than IMAP.

## File Transfer Protocol (FTP)

When running your websites and web applications on the Internet, you'll need a way to transfer the files from your local computer to the server they'll run on. The standard protocol used for this is the File Transfer Protocol or FTP. FTP allows you to list, send, receive and delete files on a server. Your server must run an FTP Server and you will need an FTP Client on your local machine.

## Secure Shell Protocol (SSH)

SSH stands for Secure Shell or Secure Socket Shell. It is a cryptographic network protocol that allows two computers to communicate and share the data over an insecure network such as the internet. It is used to login to a remote server to execute commands and data transfer from one machine to another machine.

The SSH protocol was developed by SSH communication security Ltd to safely communicate with the remote machine.

Its security features are widely used by network administrators for managing systems and applications remotely.

The SSH protocol protects the network from various attacks such as DNS spoofing, IP source routing, and IP spoofing.

A simple example can be understood, such as suppose you want to transfer a package to one of your friends. Without SSH protocol, it can be opened and read by anyone. But if you will send it using SSH protocol, it will be encrypted and secured with the public keys, and only the receiver can open it.

## SSH File Transfer Protocol (SFTP)

The data is transmitted insecurely when using the File Transfer Protocol. This means that third parties may understand the data that you are sending. This is not right if you transmit company files such as software and databases. To solve this, the SSH File Transfer Protocol, alternatively called the Secure File Transfer Protocol, can be used to transfer files over the SSH protocol. This ensures that the data is transmitted securely. Most FTP clients also support the SFTP protocol.
